proposal/project_proposal.md, before:

P8105 Project Proposal
================
November 5, 2018

| Name          | Uni     |
|---------------|---------|
| Shuliang Deng | sd3258  |
| Nick Williams | ntw2117 |
| Sijia Yue     | sy2824  |
| Jack Yan      | xy2395  |
| Alina Levine  | al3851  |

### Title: Analyzing trends in organ donor registration in New York State

### Data sources:

-   [New York State Organ and Tissue Donor Counts](https://health.data.ny.gov/Health/Donate-Life-Organ-and-Tissue-Donor-Registry-Enroll/sqk8-8a2h/data?fbclid=IwAR0DjHPMd3up76Cq1bMH0z12f_vr4rLz5YwtMPcT2kc_a5nP-nVJlDEinNE)
-   United States Census information supplied by Area health resources file and SAIPE

### The motivation for this project

Organ donor shortage is a public health crisis in New York state. In 2015 New York had the lowest donor registration rate in the US and in general, New York is known for [its low registration rate](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/11/nyregion/organ-donation-is-desperate-in-new-york.html). Although people waiting for organs from deceased donors can register on other states' registries, there are often difficulties in doing this, especially for people of lower socio-economic status. Between June 2016 and June 2017 7.2 percent of waitlisted potential organ recipients died while waiting for an [organ at CUMC](https://www.srtr.org/transplant-centers/ny-presbyterian-hospitalcolumbia-univ-medical-center-nycp/?organ=kidney&recipientType=adult&donorType=). It is important that New York encourage its eligible pool of donors to register, so that life saving organs do not go to waste.

[The govenor of New York has taken measures](https://www.governor.ny.gov/news/governor-cuomo-announces-over-5-million-new-yorkers-enrolled-states-donate-life-registry-organ) such as adding the option to register on health insurance applications as well as better wording the donation registration option on drivers license applications.

More targeted efforts could be beneficial for increasing organ donor registration rates in New York. Our group will compare county wide donor registration rates in New York to see if there are counties that are especially lacking in donor registration. We will look at different county wide factors such as median income level and education levels and will explore possible correlations with organ donor registration.

To identify regions that need more attention, it is important that we compare donor registration trends across counties. Are some counties with very low registration rates making progress while others are not? How did different counties respond to legislation put in place by Andrew Cuomo in 2016 and 2017?

### Intended final product

-   A final report
-   A webpage
-   A screencast

### Analyses

In this project, we will:

-   Compare county wide donor registration rates in New York to see if there are counties that are lacking in donor registration. We will map the registration rate on to a New York state map using `ggmap`.
-   Explore possible correlations between county wide factors (such as median income level) and organ donor registration rate.
-   Compare donor registration rate trends across counties using an animated plot.

### Timeline

| Date             | Completed tasks                                 |
|------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
| November 12 - 16 | Have project approved by instructor team        |
| November 19      | All data to be used is tidied and ready for use |
| November 26      | All plots and webpage structure completed       |
| December 1 - 5   | Work on project report and screencast           |
| December 6       | Turn in report and screencast                   |
| December 11      | Show off how awesome we are in class            |

Commit message:

gave more detail on analyses, challenges, and visualizations

proposal/project_proposal.md, after:

P8105 Project Proposal
================
November 5, 2018

| Name          | Uni     |
|---------------|---------|
| Shuliang Deng | sd3258  |
| Nick Williams | ntw2117 |
| Sijia Yue     | sy2824  |
| Jack Yan      | xy2395  |
| Alina Levine  | al3851  |

### Title: Analyzing trends in organ donor registration in New York State

### Data sources:

-   [New York State Organ and Tissue Donor Counts](https://health.data.ny.gov/Health/Donate-Life-Organ-and-Tissue-Donor-Registry-Enroll/sqk8-8a2h/data?fbclid=IwAR0DjHPMd3up76Cq1bMH0z12f_vr4rLz5YwtMPcT2kc_a5nP-nVJlDEinNE)
-   United States Census information supplied by Area health resources file and SAIPE

### The motivation for this project

Organ donor shortage is a public health crisis in New York state. In 2015 New York had the lowest donor registration rate in the US and in general, New York is known for [its low registration rate](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/11/nyregion/organ-donation-is-desperate-in-new-york.html). Although people waiting for organs from deceased donors can register on other states' registries, there are often difficulties in doing this, especially for people of lower socio-economic status. Between June 2016 and June 2017 7.2 percent of waitlisted potential organ recipients died while waiting for an [organ at CUMC](https://www.srtr.org/transplant-centers/ny-presbyterian-hospitalcolumbia-univ-medical-center-nycp/?organ=kidney&recipientType=adult&donorType=). It is important that New York encourage its eligible pool of donors to register, so that life saving organs do not go to waste.

[The govenor of New York has taken measures](https://www.governor.ny.gov/news/governor-cuomo-announces-over-5-million-new-yorkers-enrolled-states-donate-life-registry-organ) such as adding the option to register on health insurance applications as well as better wording the donation registration option on drivers license applications.

More targeted efforts could be beneficial for increasing organ donor registration rates in New York. Our group will compare county wide donor registration rates in New York to see if there are counties that are especially lacking in donor registration. We will look at different county wide factors such as median income level and education levels and will explore possible correlations with organ donor registration.

To identify regions that need more attention, it is important that we compare donor registration trends across counties. Are some counties with very low registration rates making progress while others are not? How did different counties respond to legislation put in place by Andrew Cuomo in 2016 and 2017?

### Intended final product

-   A final report
-   A webpage
-   A screencast

### Analyses, visualizations, and challenges

In this project, we will:

-   Compare county wide donor registration rates in New York to see if there are counties that are lacking in donor registration. This will include making a choropleth map to visualize differences in registration rate across New York state counties.
-   Explore possible correlations between county wide factors (such as median income level) and organ donor registration rate. If the data is sufficient, we wil explore using a mixed-effects regression model to test if specific county level variables influence changes in registration prevalence.
-   Compare donor registration rate trends across counties using an animated plot.

We anticipate the largest coding challenge to come from the choropleth map and the animated plot.

### Timeline

| Date             | Completed tasks                                 |
|------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
| November 12 - 16 | Have project approved by instructor team        |
| November 19      | All data to be used is tidied and ready for use |
| November 26      | All plots and webpage structure completed       |
| November 30      | Have webpage completed                          |
| December 1 - 5   | Work on project report and screencast           |
| December 6       | Turn in report and screencast                   |
| December 11      | Show off how awesome we are in class            |
